Deploy production ordering service doc (#2080)
hyperledger/fabric: docs/source/deployorderer/ordererplan.md

# Planning for an ordering service

Audience: Architects, network operators, users setting up a production Fabric network who are familiar with Transport Layer Security (TLS), Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and Membership Service Providers (MSPs).

Check out the conceptual topic on [The Ordering Service](../orderer/ordering_service.html) for an overview on ordering service concepts, implementations, and the role an ordering service plays in a transaction.

> In a Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks that are processed peers and committed to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.

Reviewer: Beyond the suggestion I'm making in the first sentence, the last sentence is still too long and complex to understand. I'm not understanding the point you are trying to make... whether peer nodes participate in ordering or not has nothing to do with probabilistic consensus and potential forks. I think the entire last sentence could be removed.

```suggestion
In a Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks, which peers will then validate and commit to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.
```

Author: I think it's important for new users to understand that one of the key differences between Fabric and other blockchain networks is that the ordering process is performed by a dedicated node. This language is largely copied from the ordering service key concept doc. I think it's probably fine to stop at "any and all nodes", though.

## Certificates from a non-Fabric CA

While it is possible to use a non-Fabric CA to generate identities, this process requires that you manually construct the MSP folders the ordering service and its organization need. That process will not be covered here and will instead focus on using a Fabric CA to generate the identities and MSP folders for you.

## Transport Layer Security (TLS) enablement

To prevent “man in the middle” attacks and otherwise secure communications, the use of TLS is a requirement for any production network. Therefore, in addition to registering your ordering nodes identities with your organization CA, you will also need to create certificates for your ordering nodes with the TLS CA of your organization. These TLS certificates will be used by the ordering nodes when communicating with the network.

## Creating the system channel genesis block

Note: “consenters” refers to the nodes servicing a particular channel at a particular time. For each channel, the “consenters” may be a subset of the ordering nodes available in the system channel.

> Every ordering node must be bootstrapped with a configuration block, known as the "genesis block", that contains configuration of a channel. While application channels also contain genesis blocks, the genesis block an ordering node is bootstrapped with is the genesis block of what’s called the “orderer system channel”.

Reviewer: Doesn't have to be genesis block, can also be a later configuration block (note, this is why the orderer.yaml config option name changed from 'GenesisFile' to 'BootstrapFile' starting in v2.0.

```suggestion
Every ordering node must be bootstrapped with a configuration block from the system channel, either the system channel "genesis block" or a later configuration block. This guide will assume you are creating a new ordering service and will therefore bootstrap ordering nodes from a system channel genesis block.
```

# Planning for an ordering service

Audience: Architects, network operators, users setting up a production Fabric network who are familiar with Transport Layer Security (TLS), Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and Membership Service Providers (MSPs).

Check out the conceptual topic on [The Ordering Service](./orderer/ordering_service.html) for an overview on ordering service concepts, implementations, and the role an ordering service plays in a transaction.

> In Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks and sends them to peers to be committed to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks and sends them to peers to be committed to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.
```

Reviewer 2: `which literally orders transactions into blocks`

Silly side note: wouldn't be an accurate reflection of the 2020 lexicon without the usage (and thankfully accurate usage) of `literally` in this doc. ;)

Author: Haha. It felt weird to not throw that in there because you'd just be saying than an orderer orders something.

> In a Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks and sends them to peers to be committed to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.

Reviewer: Orderers don't "send" blocks to peers. I've fixed that part here.
Also, the sentence "This separates..." goes in many unrelated directions, I didn't fix that part yet.

```suggestion
In a Hyperledger Fabric network, a node or collection of nodes together form what's called an "ordering service", which literally orders transactions into blocks, which are then processed by peers and committed to their ledgers. This separates Fabric from other distributed blockchains, such as Ethereum and Bitcoin, in which this ordering is done by any and all nodes, requiring the establishment of probabilistic consensus algorithms which eventually guarantee ledger consistency to a high degree of probability, but which are still vulnerable to divergent ledgers (also known as a ledger “fork”), where different participants in the network have a different view of the accepted order of transactions.
```

## Generate ordering node identities and Membership Service Providers (MSPs)

Before proceeding with this topic, you should have reviewed the process for a Deploying a Certificate Authority (CA) for your organization in order to generate the identities and MSPs for the admins and ordering nodes in your organization. To learn how to use a CA to create these identities, check out [Registering and enrolling identities with a CA](https://hyperledger-fabric-ca.readthedocs.io/en/release-1.4/deployguide/use_CA.html). Note that the best practice is to register and enroll a separate node identity for each ordering node and to use distinct TLS certificates for each node.

> Note that the “cryptogen” tool should never be used to generate any identities in a production scenario.

Reviewer 2: For consistency with the other references to tools
```suggestion
Note that the `cryptogen` tool should never be used to generate any identities in a production scenario.
```

## Certificates from a non-Fabric CA

While it is possible to use a non-Fabric CA to generate identities, this process requires that you manually construct the MSP folders the ordering service and its organization need. That process will not be covered here and will instead focus on using a Fabric CA to generate the identities and MSP folders for you.

## Transport Layer Security (TLS) enablement

To prevent “man in the middle” attacks and otherwise secure communications, the use of TLS is a requirement for any production network. Therefore, in addition to registering your ordering nodes identities with your organization CA, you will also need to create certificates for your ordering nodes with the TLS CA of your organization. These TLS certificates will be used by the ordering nodes when communicating with the network.

> ## Creating the genesis block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating the system channel genesis block
```

Note: “consenters” refers to the nodes servicing a particular channel at a particular time. For each channel, the “consenters” may be a subset of the ordering nodes available in the system channel.

> Every ordering node must be bootstrapped with a configuration block that contains configuration of a channel. When creating an ordering service, this block as known as the "genesis block". While application channels also contain genesis blocks, the genesis block an ordering node is bootstrapped with is the genesis block of what’s called the “orderer system channel”.

Reviewer: I think this paragraph is confusing because it starts off talking about channels and genesis block, and the reader will assume you are talking about application channels at first. I'd suggest introduce system channel first, then say ordering nodes are bootstrapped from the system channel genesis block, then say ordering nodes can also be consenters for application channels.

> This “system channel” is a special channel run by the ordering service and contains, among other things, the list of peer organizations that are allowed to create application channels (this list is known as the “consortium”). Although this system channel cannot be joined by peers or peer organizations (and thus, no transactions other than configuration transactions can be made on it), it does contain many of the same configuration parameters that application channels contain. Because application channels inherit these configuration values by default unless they are changed during the channel creation process, take care when creating your genesis block to keep the use case of your network in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This “system channel” is a special channel run by the ordering service and contains, among other things, the list of peer organizations that are allowed to create application channels (this list is known as the “consortium”). Although this system channel cannot be joined by peers or peer organizations (and thus, no transactions other than configuration transactions can be made on it), it does contain many of the same configuration parameters that application channels contain. Because application channels inherit these configuration values by default unless they are changed during the channel creation process, take care when creating your system channel genesis block to keep the use case of your network in mind.
```

> If you’re creating an ordering service, you must create this genesis block by specifying the necessary parameters in `configtx.yaml` and using the `configtxgen` tool to create the block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you’re creating an ordering service, you must create this system channel genesis block by specifying the necessary parameters in `configtx.yaml` and using the `configtxgen` tool to create the block.
```

> If you are adding a node to the system channel, the best practice is to bootstrapped using the latest configuration block of the system channel. Similarly, an ordering node added to the consenter of an application channel will be boostrapped using the latest configuration block of that channel.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are adding a node to the system channel, the best practice is to bootstrap using the latest configuration block of the system channel. Similarly, an ordering node added to the consenter of an application channel will be boostrapped using the latest configuration block of that channel.
```

> Note that the `configtx.yaml` that is shipped with Fabric binaries is identical to the [sample `configtx.yaml` found here](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/master/sampleconfig/configtx.yaml), and contains the same channel "profiles" that are used to specify particular desired policies and parameters (for example, it can be used to which ordering nodes that are consenters in the system channel will be used in an application channel). When creating a channel (whether for an orderer system channel or an application channel), you specify a particular profile by name in your channel creation command, and that profile, along with the other parameters specified in `configtx.yaml`, are used to build the configuration block.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the `configtx.yaml` that is shipped with Fabric binaries is identical to the [sample `configtx.yaml` found here](https://github.com/hyperledger/fabric/blob/master/sampleconfig/configtx.yaml), and contains the same channel "profiles" that are used to specify particular desired policies and parameters (for example, it can be used to specify(?) which ordering nodes that are consenters in the system channel will be used in an application channel). When creating a channel (whether for an orderer system channel or an application channel), you specify a particular profile by name in your channel creation command, and that profile, along with the other parameters specified in `configtx.yaml`, are used to build the configuration block.
```

You will likely have to modify one of these profiles in order to create your system channel and to create your application channels (if nothing else, you are likely to have to modify the sample organization names). Note that to create a Raft ordering service, you will have to specify an `OrdererType` of `etcdraft`.

> Check out the [tutorial on creating a channel](../create_channel/create_channel.html#the-orderer-system-channel) for more information on how to create a genesis block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Check out the [tutorial on creating a channel](../create_channel/create_channel.html#the-orderer-system-channel) for more information on how to create a system channel and application channels.
```

### Creating profiles for application channels

> Both the system and all application channels are built using a `configtx.yaml` file. Therefore, when editing your `configtx.yaml` to create the genesis block for your system channel, you can also add profiles for any application channels that will be created on this network. However, note that while you can define any set of consenters for each channel, **every consenter added to an application channel must first be a part of the system channel**. You cannot specify a consenter that is not a part of the system channel. Also, it is not possible to control the leader of the consenter set. Leaders are chosen by the `etcd` protocol used by the ordering nodes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both the system and all application channels are built using a `configtx.yaml` file. Therefore, when editing your `configtx.yaml` to create the genesis block for your system channel, you can also add profiles for any application channels that will be created on this network. However, note that while you can define any set of consenters for each channel, **every consenter added to an application channel must first be a part of the system channel**. You cannot specify a consenter that is not a part of the system channel. Also, it is not possible to control the leader of the consenter set. Leaders are chosen by the `etcdraft` protocol used by the ordering nodes.
```
Or similar like `raft` or `etcd/raft`, plain `etcd` seems wrong to me on initial glance. I'm sure @jyellick will know the accurate way to reference it here.

Author: I'll change this one to `etcdraft` for now, as that seems like the right answer to me.

## Sizing your ordering node resources

> Because ordering nodes do not host a state database or chaincode, an ordering node will typically only have a single container associated with it. Like the “peer container” associated with the peer, this container encapsulates the ordering processes that order and commit transactions for all channels on which the ordering node is a consenter (ordering nodes also validating actions in particular cases). The ordering node storage includes the blockchain for all of channels on which the node is a consenter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because ordering nodes do not host a state database or chaincode, an ordering node will typically only have a single container associated with it. Like the “peer container” associated with the peer, this container encapsulates the ordering processes that order and commit transactions for all channels on which the ordering node is a consenter (ordering nodes also validate actions in particular cases). The ordering node storage includes the blockchain for all of channels on which the node is a consenter.
```

> Because ordering nodes do not host a state database or chaincode, an ordering node will typically only have a single container associated with it. Like the “peer container” associated with the peer, this container encapsulates the ordering processes that order and commit transactions for all channels on which the ordering node is a consenter (ordering nodes also validate actions in particular cases). The ordering node storage includes the blockchain for all of channels on which the node is a consenter.

Reviewer: I'd reserve the word "commit" for peers.

```suggestion
Because ordering nodes do not host a state database or chaincode, an ordering node will typically only have a single container associated with it. Like the “peer container” associated with the peer, this container encapsulates the ordering process that orders transactions into blocks for all channels on which the ordering node is a consenter (ordering nodes also validate actions in particular cases). The ordering node storage includes the blockchain for all of channels on which the node is a consenter.
```

However, more nodes means a larger communication overhead, as the leader must communicate with all of the nodes in order for the ordering service to function properly. If a node thinks it has lost connection with the leader, even if this loss of communication is only due to a networking or processing delay, it is designed to trigger a leader election. Unnecessary leader elections only add to the communications overhead for the leader, progressively escalating the burden on the cluster. And because, each channel an ordering node participates in is, logically, a separate Raft instance, an orderer participating in 100 channels is actually doing 100x the work as an ordering node in a single channel.

For these reasons, Raft clusters of more than a few dozen nodes begin to see noticeable performance degradation. Once clusters reach about 100 nodes, they begin having trouble maintaining quorum. The stage at which a deployment experiences issues is dependent on factors such as networking speeds and other resources available, and there are parameters such as the tick interval which can be used to mitigate the larger communications overhead.

> The optimum number of ordering nodes for your ordering service ultimately depends on your use case, your resources, and your topology. However, clusters of three, five, seven, or nine nodes, are the most popular, with no more than about 50 channels per orderer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optimal number of ordering nodes for your ordering service ultimately depends on your use case, your resources, and your topology. However, clusters of three, five, seven, or nine nodes, are the most popular, with no more than about 50 channels per orderer.
```
Nit: looks like this is an acceptable usage of the word but it seems uncommon.

Author: This one led me down a bit of a rabbit hole lol. They both seem fine but I don't mind changing this to optimal if it's the more common usage.

## Storage considerations and monitoring

> The storage that should be allocated to an ordering node depends on factors such as the estimate transaction throughput, the size of blocks, and number of channels the node will be joined to. Your needs will depend on your use case. However, the best practice is to monitor the storage available to your nodes closely. You may also decide to enable an autoscaler, which will allocate more resources to your node, if your infrastructure allows it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The storage that should be allocated to an ordering node depends on factors such as the estimated transaction throughput, the size of blocks, and number of channels the node will be joined to. Your needs will depend on your use case. However, the best practice is to monitor the storage available to your nodes closely. You may also decide to enable an autoscaler, which will allocate more resources to your node, if your infrastructure allows it.
```

Author: I think "expected" is actually better here, but thank you for flagging that "estimate" was definitely a typo.

If the storage for an ordering node is exhausted you also have the option to deploy a new node with a larger storage allocation and allow it to sync with the relevant ledgers. If you have several ordering nodes available to use, ensure that each node is a consenter on approximately the same number of channels.

In a production environment you should also monitor the CPU and memory allocated to an ordering node using widely available tooling. If you see an ordering node struggling to keep up (for example, it might be calling for leader elections when none is needed), it is a sign that you might need to increase its resource allocation.

> ## Gossip

Reviewer: Remove this whole section - orderers do not participate in gossip at all.

While peers pull blocks from orderers, and we sometimes put this under the banner of "gossip", it isn't actually gossip, it's just a simple grpc pull, and then peers "gossip" to other peers. Orderers do not participate in gossip whatsoever.
